[Music]
did you know that there are terminator
events in the life of our son that can
spawn a solar tsunami colossal and
superfast waves of pure burning plasma
making the magnetic poles of the Sun go
bonkers and literally flip sound scary
yeah so scary in fact I couldn't resist
learning more about it so I could share
my research with you let's climb this
mountain of slightly disturbing facts
from the ground up starting with the
simplest question of all what is our Sun
and what is any star for that matter
don't rush to answer because the
following one may surprise you the Sun
is literally a ball of countless nuclear
explosions see for yourself
one of the two main components of the
Sun is a gas called hydrogen this one
element constitutes around 75 percent of
all the mass in the universe and fills
the core of the Sun it's also the most
convenient element for nuclear fusion
say that with me
fusion immense pressure and heat around
27 million degrees produced by the Sun's
gravitational force pushes atoms of
hydrogen to fuse into each other and
form a new atom an atom of helium this
is why it's called nuclear fusion you
know every second the Sun transforms 620
million tons of hydrogen into helium
whoo that could fill a lot of balloons
this process releases an amount of
energy roughly equal to the explosion of
92 billion megatons of TNT that's more
than enough to blast an earth-sized
planet away nothing to joke about really
and remember this is all in just one
second the whole process takes place in
only the heaviest hottest and most
pressurized part of the Sun its core
oddly enough this part takes up the
least amount of space compared to the
other layers of our sun's interior the
core is just a fifth of the whole
diameter of the Sun while the Sun is 109
times wider than the earth its core is
only about 22 times larger than our
planet
all the mass and energy in the core of
the Sun is contained by its own
gravitational force but none of the
hydrogen and helium can stay in their
gas form in such conditions all the
sun's contents are actually plasma this
is the fourth state of matter and
believe me you don't only see it in your
plasma TV in sci-fi movies fire and
electrical discharges like lightning our
plasma - to be perfectly fair 99.9% of
all matter in the universe is plasma and
only a tiny fraction of it consists of a
solid tangible material now you can make
an educated guess about what the solar
tsunami wave could possibly be it's a
huge wave of plasma that shoots itself
from the surface of the Sun imagine a
wall of blazing light that's eight times
higher than the diameter of the earth
itself and then imagine it moving at
five hundred sixty thousand miles per
hour
ever saw how fast lightning is well this
monstrous wave is two-and-a-half times
faster than that the first time
astronomers discovered a solar tsunami
in 1997 they couldn't believe that their
data was correct they thought what they
saw was just a sudden shadow or a
malfunction of the tech but it was a
wave in 2009 using NASA's Observatory
called stereo astronomers were able to
finally confirm it they even saw the
wave breaking on sunspots unable to
proceed further in some parts but the
cause of these tsunamis was still a
mystery for a long time
only recently Scott Macintosh led a
group of scientists in a study that shed
light on these events yes that pun was
intentional they concluded that solar
tsunamis are an integral part of solar
cycles each of the solar cycles is a
period equal to about 11 years and by
the end of each cycle the sun's magnetic
poles switch ends it's also called a
sunspot cycle since the Sun changes its
sunspot activity during this time as
well
there's more to every celestial object
than what we can detect with our human
eyes there are invisible things like the
Earth's atmosphere or heliosphere in
case of the Sun there are vast areas of
gravitational pull around each planet or
star and of course there are magnetic
fields the Sun and the earth like every
other big body in space can be imagined
as magnets as you probably know every
magnet has two oppositely charged sides
positive and negative here on the right
side we always stay positive but
celestial bodies eventually choose these
sides the difference between the Sun and
the earth is that the Sun changes its
polarities every 11 years while the
sturdy structure of the Earth's core
allows it to retain its polarities for
about a million years we live in a time
of the greatest opportunities for
researchers the midpoint of the solar
cycle passed by in April of 2014 it was
called the solar maximum the point in
which the sunspot activity of our Sun
was at its peak now we're preparing for
the end of the current solar cycle and
the beginning of a new one which will be
marked by the point in which the Sun
becomes less active and produces less
sunspots or the solar minimum to be fair
one pole of the Sun has already changed
its charge basically at the end of a
solar cycle the Sun has two positive
pulse yeah don't panic the other pole
will change its polarity soon but in the
meantime the Sun is still perfectly
balanced by the lesser points of the
solar magnetic field with events like
that it's no wonder a lot of
fear-mongering prophecies appear all
around the world and it doesn't help
when scientists decide to call something
related to our solar cycle the
Terminator we've lived through lots of
solar cycles before with absolutely no
problems being every 11 years it's
pretty probable that you've seen at
least one of them and are certainly
going to witness the upcoming one
speaking of Terminator events this is
just the name for the movement of the
solar magnetic field when it moves
through the Sun it builds a pool of
charged plasma behind it and then when
two such fields collide with each other
their pools literally explode and
release all their energy by forming a
solar tsunami Terminator events were
found via a careful examination of data
that's been collected in the last 140
years the most interesting things about
them were extreme ultraviolet outbursts
they marked the process of a terminator
event so this word doesn't mean anything
really scary solar tsunamis happen
regularly and they're relatively
harmless to us this brings us to the
next question what's the big deal with
all this panic about solar cycles the
thing is the earth is naturally
protected from hazardous cosmic
radiation by its own magnetic field and
by the magnetic field of our Sun which
reaches far beyond our planet all kinds
of ominous prophecies suggest that the
changing of the sun's poles may cause a
breach in this protective field incoming
radiation might destroy all of Earth's
technology and effectively push people
back to the Stone Age mmm-hmm trust me
this isn't going to happen even when you
word it like that you can tell something
is wrong with this story the magnetic
field of the Sun sure will become a
little unstable but only for a very
brief amount of time you will notice a
thing and what's better we have proof of
that nothing catastrophic happened 11
years ago but still there's one thing we
can't know for sure as I mentioned
before it's not only the Sun that can
switch its magnetic poles but the earth
too the last time that happened was over
780 thousand years ago and we can barely
predict when it will happen next time
the only thing we know for sure is that
780 thousand years ago it didn't seem to
cause too much trouble for life on Earth
but our existence is a lot more
complicated now we need navigation our
orbital satellites and electricity all
of which could be damaged if the
magnetic field of the earth becomes
weaker there are already zones in which
the magnetic field becomes weaker at an
alarming rate and researchers are doing
their best to predict what happens next
so what do you think would happen if we
lost the technology we use daily let me
know down in the comments
either way the magnetic field will
stabilize soon and it won't bring a real
catastrophe like some people say just a
challenge for humanity's knowledge about
the planet we live on
with more scientific breakthroughs like
the ones I told you about today I think
it's safe to say that our future is in
the right hands hey if you learn
something new today then give this video
a like and share with a friend and here
are some other videos I think you'll
enjoy just click to the left or right
and remember stay on the bright side of
life
[Music]